Start back in public session this afternoon on the
planning bill and Natural Environment Bill.
And we have our first submitter with us,
the Civil Contractors New Zealand.
Uh, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
It's great to have you with us.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over
to you for your opening remarks and introductions
and to talk us through your submission.
But do take it as, uh, read,
and of course members will have questions,
so we'll hand it over to you.
Perfect. Well thanks Madam Chair and committee members.
Thanks for the chance to, uh,
address you on behalf of civil contract.
So we represent about 800 businesses that deliver
what we call the backbone of horizontal infrastructure,
roads, water, and so on from there.
Um, can I also thank you that chief
for allowing us a little bit more time,
uh, for our submissions.
It's a very complex,
but legislation, as you know, we have extensive consultation
and we needed to conduct, so we really
appreciate that extra time.
So thank you for that. So look, I'm Alan Pollard.
I'm Chief Executive of Civil Contractors, uh, with me today.
First on my left, Fraser May.
He's our communications and advocacy manager.
Hard left on the corner there.
Uh, Richard Galloway from CCNZ, uh,
member Company McConnell Dowell.
Uh, and on my right, uh, burning
that independent consultant,
do cell plus put the submission together as well.
So in in general terms, we welcome the introduction
of the planning bill and the, uh, natural environment bill.
This is a generational opportunity,
and it's one that, uh, does seek to replace some, uh,
a management system that becomes frankly unwieldy, uh,
over litigious, incredibly falsely
for both infrastructure providers, uh,
and the communities we serve.
As you know, the Infrastructure Commission has just
published its, um, infrastructure plan.
It sets out a vision for the next 30 years, uh,
for infrastructure delivery.
The projects that are contained in those, in that plan, uh,
are not optional, not necessary
for the benefit of our communities.
So our core message really is that in the consenting
and compliance framework, we have to be practical, we have
to be proportionate, and it has to be workable.
If, uh, we are serious about delivering infrastructure
efficiently and affordably to do this
and to better protect the environment, we have
to reduce complexity.
And we've got a right size the system.
We support the efforts of the bill
to reduce unnecessary consenting for routine civil works
and to promote greater standardization across regions.
These are foundational steps to unlocking housing,
unlocking regional growth, and eventually productivity.
We do, however, strongly caution against any reform
that simply replaces ambiguities with more ambiguity.
Uh, while the proposed legislation speaks to the issue,
in truth, how its application will come into force
or being does depend on layers of secondary legislation.
And I'm sure you'll hear all about those from other
submitters, uh, as well.
So, so for my introductory comments,
we support the intent of the build.
You have our absolute commitment as an industry
and our members that will continue to work constructively
with government and all stakeholders to ensure
that these changes lead to better outcomes for contractors,
for communities, and the environment.
Our members know, and they absolutely accept
that they have a critical role in ensuring
that any resource management system is
implemented successfully.
So I'll just pass over to my colleague Fraser
to explore a bit more detail.
Okay, thanks very much, Alan.
Um, Adrian, uh, just like
to expand very quickly on, uh, submissions.
We've given you quite a lot of detail in the submission,
so we try and leave plenty of time for questions
after, so that we can get
through any questions you might have about that.
I just wanted to give you a couple of examples, uh, about,
um, the issues we've been experiencing
and then perhaps tie that back to some of the solutions
that are proposed in the current legislation.
Uh, some things are not going well
with the system at the moment.
We hear from members about complexity and cost
and actually really poor environmental outcomes
that are driven by how some
of the regulations have put in place at the moment.
A really key example is soil.
Uh, so lack of clear definitions, poor,
poor application of the standards.
And, um, real sort of unwillingness
to look at at the practice and,
and fa of how, how what the consequences
of the regulations are at the moment
is putting massive costs into,
into infrastructure construction.
And, um, adding around, well, it's,
it's been measured at 2.4 billion by wastelands on, um,
on top of our infrastructure bill just on moving soil
and taking to the tip, which is not
something contractors are happy about.
They'd rather be reusing, reusing it on site.
And, um, the way the standards are put in place at the
moment is not enabling that.
Um, it's really important to resolve it,
but, um, that's just an example of, of of what needs
to change if we're gonna be successful in having a system
that better protects the environment
and actually is more cost effective doing it.
So look, we need to reduce complexity.
We need to get it right. Um, significant part
of the issue at the moment is
that regulations developed without looking at
what the practice is first.
So, uh, when we heard changes were announced, uh, and, and,
and actually that some of the national standards work,
so I'm kind of anticipating what comes next
through national direction and national standards.
Uh, we kind of thought, well, hmm, that's gonna be a lot
of work now had another think about it.
And then we thought, well, uh, if it's connected enough,
we don't need to make things that much harder for ourselves.
Actually, our members do this stuff every day in terms
of moving earth, in terms of putting, um,
environmental protection in place.
And if we can take some of that knowledge
and then build it into the system, that that's great.
So for that reason, I've, I've, um, tabled, uh,
what we new each a copy of the CNZ Environmental Guide,
which shows how those controls can be put in place simply.
So it, it's for things like, you know,
what de the decibel is a piece
of construction machinery might put out.
We did have a case in, um, one of the regions
where driven piling basically got outlawed by by
because they said that it exceeded the decibel limit.
And so if you, but if you've got a short term impact like
that, is it in a field?
Is it in urban center?
You know, those are the sorts of complexities that, um,
aren't handled through grant blankets, uh,
blanket regulations.
So I know, I know that that's kind of been dealt
with legislation, but just example.
Um, so yeah, that I, I've given you that as an example of
where, and, you know, a few pages, we can make it simple for
second, uh, coming back to higher level conversation.
But if we can reduce the, the regulatory burden, like we,
we'll be able to do things swiftly.
And, and I just wanna give you an example
of how that could be handled.
Um, and, and that was something
that members were quite concerned around, which was
around the, uh, clause 38 in the planning bill
and Clause 39 in the natural environment bill, which
where permitted activities must be no rules,
permitted activity rules must require written notification
to permitting authorities.
And, um, some individual companies might have hundreds
of activities they can conducting every day.
If you've gotta notify hundreds of permitted activities
to permitting authority every day, then
that's not gonna be a practical system.
It's not gonna reduce complexity.
Um, it's over notification.
So, I mean, maybe that's just changed
a change from the word must to the word make.
Uh, but that's sort of change that is practical and,
and that we can actually make at this stage.
So I think was 38
and 39, uh, you know, if we can, if we can say that, uh,
it's gonna reduce the burden on permitting authorities
and on, uh, infrastructure system.
So, you know, I hope this drafting error,
but it's just an example again, of where we can reduce
regulatory complexity, complexity,
complexity, get the word right.
Um, and I hope those give you some examples
and what we see a work system to be like.
Um, in summary, CCCs and supports the reform.
We've got a few, yeah, we just a little bit
of fine tuning needed around
workability clarity and fairness.
Um, just like to pass to my colleague Richard Galloway here
from McConnell Dowell,
and if you wouldn't mind saying a
few words, Richard, that'd be great.
Sure. Um, look, I've got a few examples of, of things here
and how we can see the, that being supported,
but I guess, do you wanna use this time to ask us questions
or do you want me to, to run through some examples of
what we're seeing at the day?
No, don't feel free to run through a couple
of examples. Okay,
Lovely. Um, well
look, I guess first of all,
phrase I mentioned clean fills
and how, uh, that the soil management,
to give you an example, a couple years ago project in
Rucker, I had to move 20,000 cubes of dirt.
That's 2000 truck and trailer loads.
Closest clean fill I could find
to use was our south coast of Wellton.
So we moved 2000 truck
and trailer loads, burning all the fossil fuels all the way
through Brooklyn, past all the shops past into schools, down
to the South coast and back out again
because there'd been no planning in place to support
or facilitate clean fills close to the site
or anywhere in the Hu Valley.
So, um, suboptimal.
So, so yeah, that's why it's really important we see to get
that, that soil management part included.
Um, but a couple of things around designations. Yeah.
And looking at how it's set up to work
with construction plans, uh, fantastic.
Um, it does need to be really careful
that it makes your designation stay high level,
and the level of information
that people know about when they're preparing a
designation is pretty light.
Uh, and it's only when we work through a project
that we start to know more of the detail.
Now, I take an example, live, live example right now, um,
up towards, up the coast on a, um,
a large expressway project we're working on where, uh,
a bridge that thought the best solution was
to put two bridges close next to each other.
Um, those we work through the details, start
to understand more about the, um, soil conditions,
hydrology conclusions.
It's better to put it together a single bridge, um,
conclusion at the moment
or advices that that would be a change
and it would need to go back through recons consenting.
Mm, not within, not within general accordance, uh,
when you're running at about a million dollars a day.
That's what we are currently running at.
That's the project cost at the moment.
Uh, something like that, which gets in the way
and requires you to have a plan.
And another plan, another plan, um,
is obviously really expensive.
Um, and, and simply because the original conditions were
just too tight and didn't allow for
that adaptation as we went through.
And I guess on that point of adaptation,
when we look at the precautionary principle, which is
to be written into this, um, one of the things we see
with it is that that adaptive management goes with it
and think that's really important to allow both.
I think of examples like West Wind Wind Farm, which, uh,
had two access points, uh,
and had road upgrades required for both of them.
In the end decided to only use one of them,
but was still required to do all the road upgrades
to the other, the other access point that wasn't even used.
So it had to kind of the early precautionary approach of
what if, but no adaptive management to say,
actually we're not gonna use that, so let's not to save
that money, use it better,
and essentially make renewable energy cheaper,
which would be a good outcome.
Um, I, I guess another part site to support is the, uh,
the wildlife permits.
So I see that, um,
this allows the wildlife permits to be approved in it.
I look at a couple of recent projects, um,
KU at out mile point, um, the such treatment, um, UA
Expressway, both of those we're talking $2 million,
$2 billion worth of projects.
The last permit to come through was the wildlife permit.
Mm-hmm. It was tense.
We were worried we had diggers at the waiting,
but essentially, you know, if this doesn't come
through today, we are gonna be incurring costs
and we are gonna have plant standing,
people standing being an efficient, um,
no environmental benefit at all.
So the idea of wrapping it into one approval process
definitely can see savings outta that.
Uh, but there's a few examples hopefully that that helps.
Really helpful to put it in context. Uh, absolutely.
Um, well, thank you very much for, um, that submission
and analysis.
Um, look, I might kick off with, uh, some questions just
because I was quite interested around the, um,
points you made around soil management.
And within your submission here, you've said that you feel
that there needs to be more attention in the bills, um,
and other legislation to ensure that soil should be able
to be reused where possible.
Can you just elaborate a little bit further on
what you think the solution is?
Yeah, I'll start off with that if I could.
Uh, so, uh, there, there are a few different issues there.
One is around how can contaminated is defined,
and at the moment, a lot of authorities are treating it is,
if there's a presence of contaminant, then it needs
to be disposed of at a contaminated waste site.
However, all soil contains some form of contaminant, really.
Like if you've got trace arsenic in the soil in Canterbury,
it's basically treated as contaminated
just 'cause you pick it up off the ground.
And so instead of, um, being able to reuse it at six to
or 60 a ton on, on a neighboring site, or a cont or a,
or a clean fill, that, that, you know, that six 60 a ton,
you know, that's, that's, that's disposal as well,
rather than reuse, we wanna see them reusing it.
Like, um, people are basically being forced
to truck across the Southern Alps
because it's cheaper than taking it
to contaminated waste Southern Canterbury.
It's ridiculous. Mm-hmm.
Um, so, so that's, that's an example.
So that comes from the contaminated, um, soils definitions,
and that's something that we haven't got.
Right. And that's, I think,
sitting within the national environmental standard of, so
that's an example of national direction
and the interpretation of the national direction,
not, not getting quite right.
Uh, waste Men's will have some more comment about that.
And I believe you hearing from them, um,
in a future submission, uh,
and we've been working with them closely on it
because we see there's a big problem there
and we hear about it from members all time.
They'd rather be building infrastructure than, um,
carting soil long distances. It's just So do
You agree? Do,
Do you and Wasteman agree?
I I, I think, I think we roughly agree on, on the solution
that yes, we need vetted definitions around that,
and also we need to acknowledge, um, the other part
of the issue is, is almost a social license issue.
So, um, field sites are seen as bad,
basically field sites are bad, uh, is kind
of the narrative it gets across.
And, and actually what we'd love to see is them recognized
as as a regional resource.
So if you've got, uh, and,
and emphasis on, on reusing soil, enabling that through say,
hydrovac truck waste, recy recycling,
because it's not waste, it's gravel that could be graded,
it's sand, it could be graded, recycled, reused.
If it's, um, needs to go to a fill site,
those sites should be available in close proximity to, um,
to, um, the site where the construction's taking place.
Because I mean, as, as Richard says,
we might have 20,000 CIC kiers
of soil removed from some projects.
And if that's not being provided for us, a regional need,
regional resource, uh, that then,
then we're not gonna be able to do that efficiently.
So yeah, we can, yeah.
And often it's being prevented
by the regulations from re region on site.
So I've actually written it down if anyone's interested
in the paper we've written on that.
I've actually got a couple of copies here that I'm happy
to hand out, and I could even just leave that with,
um, the committee if you like.
And I'm very happy to circulate that after and,
and to discuss it with any of you that wanna discuss it.
Okay. No, that'd be very useful. Um, Lam has a question.
Thanks so much for being here today.
Um, I wanted to pick up on what you identify
as a potentially major design for,
and your comments around, you know, what, not wanting
to go from a system of ambiguity
to potentially wanna more ambiguity.
And you pick up on the fact that, you know,
there are these two films which will still have to be
juggled and I guess navigated in this new system.
What are the implications really, if,
if we do get this wrong?
And I wanna talk,
invite your comments specifically about the timeframes,
because you know, you, we were just talking earlier about
how we've just started hearings, we've essentially got five
more days of hearings and that's it.
And then we are going into the development of this bill
to meet the government's timeframes.
What is actually the impact if we essentially don't give
this the due process and time to actually get it right,
and we are just kind of pushing it through
this side of election term.
Um, if I could start that off.
Um, but there are two things here
and I guess, um, one, uh, we're conscious that a lot
of the next steps are gonna be handled
through national direction, and that kind
of does string out the timeframe a little bit.
And I think there is some in indication through
national direction already.
Like, so if you look at the definitions in the NPS
infrastructure, I'd actually quite like
to see those definition of infrastructure carried through
to the definitions within, within the legislation,
because that, that, that's already there.
We're actually having a lot of these discussions
and I think, you know, we've had the previously proposed
RMA replacement as well.
So that's one thing. On the risks side of things though,
I mean, um, I I think that there are two approval processes,
uh, that are, that are kind of, kind of stated
with two, two bills here.
So would you be able to talk a
little bit to that point, Bernie? Um, so,
Well, it's simply, I can imagine a situation where
it's probably the case already under the RMA today, um,
where you get, you know, a permit under one piece
of legislation, but you miss out on the land use
of planning consent under the other.
Mm-hmm. Um, because the purposes
of the two acts are different and,
but it's for the same project, you could,
you could imagine a subdivision
or something like that where you would need all of
that whole bundle of consents.
Now, you could argue under the RMA today you're applying
for a bundle of consents from regional council,
also district councils.
And so you could, so the issue there,
I'm just wondering though, um, if
that's an unforeseen consequence mm-hmm.
Of the two bills having two different purposes.
So from a contractor's perspective,
say if you've got one permit
but not the other, you, you, you've, you've incurred costs,
you've, you've, you've basically started the project,
but you're stuck in limbo
for the foreseeable future if you
can't get the other permit, you know?
Mm-hmm. So that's, that's a risk.
Uh, and that's probably one of the specific
risks we wanted to point out.
Um, you know, yeah, you're right.
Tight, tight timeframe makes it difficult.
I think we've had, yeah,
I think, I mean, ultimate consequence is gonna be we can't
deliver the infrastructure program that is
so desperately needed by our communities, ultimately
because it gets tied up
and delays, it gets tied up in litigation costs escalated.
Um, you know, there's inconsistent interpretations.
It's the ambiguity, ambiguity we talk about now.
So what we're looking at is the clarity to try and,
and avoid those situations.
It is expensive, you know, the soil interpretations,
$2.4 billion, that's just that one item.
Mm-hmm. Imagine how many billions
we are losing through delays.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Rachel Brooking has a question. Yeah.
I'm interested in the discussion around activity status.
Mm-hmm. Activity classes and the permitted, um, class
and then having to pay some more money and,
and permitted coming closer to controls.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and of course, this legislation gets rid
of the controlled activity status.
Yeah. Still has the restricted discretionary
and is talking a lot about standards.
And you mentioned the appropriateness of standards
for some things, um, that contractors do, but,
but you also note that some things are more
complicated as well.
Um, so I'm just wondering on your thoughts if
rather than getting into the names of what's permitted
and what's controlled and what's restricted discretionary is
what you are looking for, clear things that you are allowed
to do if you meet the standards or the rules and the plan,
and then some other category that is tightly constrained
around what is, what is considered, and,
and then a full dis you know,
you're always gonna have full
discretionary if your project's,
It's a really good question.
I wouldn't mind demo from a Yeah. Tractors perspective,
Richard. Uh, I
guess when you look across the range of works we do
as a, as a civil industry, we, we go from, um, you know,
so pipeline pipe renewal projects, which will be, um,
essentially leading hand, a couple
of crew f*****g a digger out doing on the street,
doing some pipe placements through to highly complex,
you know, complex crane lift, marine works
that have got carefully planned engineers on site all the
time, pan it through, um, the ones at that end that the kind
of detailed bespoke conditions make sense.
But for the ones who are out there less, you know,
a lower level of supervision effectively,
because it's just a leading hand running the crew, uh,
what they want is repeatability.
They know what to do, you know,
you teach 'em what to do and they do it well.
So this is what these guys, these crews are good at.
So having clarity for what is permitted,
and especially if they can go to and lower heart
and upper heart and Wellington
and have the same rules, um, exactly what
to do is really, really advantageous.
They know how to look after the environment that,
that, that's, that's taught.
Well, you've got the guideline there of, you know, what we,
what we teach our people to do, um,
what helps us when they have the same framework
Behind it as to what notifications
and everything else that goes with it.
Thank you for that clarification.
And Priyanka, um, thank you for your submission.
I've just got one little question
and it's around, um, what you've said in relation
to emergency works.
Um, and I wondered if you could maybe expand a little
bit on what kind of clarity you're looking
for in those specific clauses.
Are you wanting emergency services listed in,
um, in the legislation?
Because I know that you say that most
of those provisions are rolled over from the current RMA,
um, and that the issue seems
to be more in the interpretation of it,
rather than the letter of the law specifically.
So yeah, so just keen to get some sense of
what clarity you're after,
but also, um, the extent of the problem
as you've experienced it.
Thank you. Yes.
Uh, I, I think we are not sure if the provisions are un the
purpose or if they may well be, and, but,
but we do see attempted prosecution say if there's an
emergency response and the contractor moves some dirt off
the road, so emergency vehicles can get through,
then someone from the council might come
and say, you didn't have give us 30 working days of notice.
Say, well, whatever timeframe they would
need to, to do that.
And, and, and it's actually instance
because they were doing it as in part
of an emergency response, but the people
that are putting forward that, uh, you know,
and trying to prosecute based on that haven't understood,
then it wastes a lot of time
and it's also very useful being told you're going
to be prosecuted for, for,
for something that doesn't really make any sense.
So that's the, the, the practical side of things.
I would say, you're gonna, you gonna unblock the COVID under
the rail line, you wanna put it back better,
so it's not gonna happen again.
Sometimes they go a little bit further
because they know that they will prevent future issues.
So yeah, there are a few hands-on things when they are
directly working for authorities,
but I, I think there's also a moral obligation there
as well in terms of saving lives and property.
So the last time I raised Pacific Committee,
the response was, yes, if people are working to save lives
and property, then there is,
they should be able to meet that obligation.
And the law currently enables that. Why is there a problem?
And I thought that was a great response.
Its a really interesting response, um,
because it's not the response you get
from a lot of other people, you know.
So I think that's not clear at the moment
how the moral obligation to save lives
and property, which, if someone has the big
equipment there, if they're, they're on site.
I mean, I called everyone after site on Gabrielle
and one guy said, you know, um, oh, I asked him hi,
and he said, oh, you know, I lost my 16 ton.
I lost my, my transporter, but I saved 16 people's lives.
So I'm stoked. And, um, amazing. Right?
Like, I mean, but um, yeah, I, I think there's,
how do you handle those two things together, you know?
So just bringing it back to the reality of the people
and what, what happens when there's an emergency
Emergency. I think there
needs to be some consistancy between the two,
both legislation and what we submitted on
what the emergency manage call was two things.
The first is early engagement with the contractors.
So we've actually said we wanna be part
of the decision process up front.
Now the NZTA response
to Cyclone Gabriel was extraordinarily good
and that it was on the back of immediately.
They set up a governance group, which included industry
and NZTA
and an operational group that reported to that group.
We had state highway five open in five weeks.
There were 38 different things
that happened on slips or bru, whatever.
Five weeks was an extraordinary result.
And the, in the broader response, uh, as soon
as the cyclone hit, we did inventory of all
of our contractors available
and all the equipment that was available.
I turned up the emergency office on day two
and said, right here's what we've got.
Where do you want us? And they
said, we don't need your help.
You know, that was the response.
It's a fundamental failure of that system,
but there has to be the consistent application across both
these bits of legislation to make it actually work.
Mm-hmm. That's a really good point.
Thank you very much for your submission today.
We have met time, um, really valuable submission and,
and great to hear the case studies
as well in terms into practice.
So, uh, we appreciate your time today.
Thanks. Thank you very much.
Okay, thank you. You and Frazier,
can I have a copy of your paper?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, Charlie, the
Someone will act, that's
Our next submitter, uh, IAG Zealand.
Welcome to the Select committee this afternoon.
You also have 20 minutes with us, so we will hand it over
to you, uh, take your submission
As read And uh, yeah,
we look forward to you talking us through it. So thank you.
Hi, afternoon all. Um, hello.
Some of you, um, I'm Bryce Stab, Andrew Saunders.
Um, we'll make some opening remarks.
There's a couple of specific points,
obviously a few closing remarks, and then open to questions.
Um, so thanks for the opportunity.
Um, we're a general insurer, uh,
so we ensure stuff.
We build generally buildings, factories,
homes, all that sort of stuff.
Mm. So our interest in this is that, you know, one
of the key factors that drives the risk
that we underwrite is where a building is
and its proximity to natural perils.
So where we place buildings in our landscape is
of fundamental importance to our ability to ensure them
and of fundamental importance to the price we charge people.
So we've always been acutely interested in the Resource
Management Act, um, as a key plank
and how New Zealand managers natural hazard risk.
Um, we have a very complex, um,
natural hazard environment in New Zealand when
that's becoming more complex.
Uh, we have communities that face multiple risks,
um, and some of those risks are growing
and some of those risks are gonna put the question marks
over their ability to stay where they are.
So we need to think very carefully about
how we manage those risks.
And so this, this bill and the supporting frameworks and,
and some, you know, legislation are gonna be really key Part
of that, our observation, um, generally is
that this bill kind of creates a framework in which we
can make good decisions,
but it doesn't necessarily require us to do it as a country.
Um, there've been lots of kind of issues
that have been raised around the previous
or the current Source Management Act.
Um, the two bills
that were gonna replace it and got the appeal.
Um, both of those also
created an environment in which we could make good decisions
about how we manage natural hazard risk
but did not require it.
And so this bill kind of does the same thing.
Uh, the success of this bill requires, um,
clear system goals, clear national direction about
what are an acceptable level of risk, uh,
consistent high quality hazard data and models
and sufficient capability, um,
to be able to implement all of that.
So this is only one piece of a much bigger puzzle for us
to get this right as a country.
Um, and without the kind of all those supporting elements
and this bill being effective, there's no guarantee
of achieving better management of risk.
Um, and then all of the dire
soundings we have about the future and about the future.
So our communities become a little more real.
Um, and we note that the key Sorry,
can you speak into the microphone a bit? Yeah,
I just wanna move that microphone.
Um, we can just hear the hallway out there. Oh, right.
Sorry. People are quite loud. Yeah, right. Okay.
Do I need to repeat anything or
shall I keep, no, I'll keep going.
Okay, good. So it, it, you know,
from our perspective it kind of lacks a kind
of a risk avoidance kind of focus to it, right?
And so Andrew, do you wanna talk a little bit about
how we see that kind of playing out,
particularly in relation to section 11?
Well, so section 11, which is kind
of the new version I guess, of sections five
and six of the RMA
and that contains those key objectives
for the regime and it contains.
So when we first looked at the bill, we looked great.
It's got a clause there on hazards. That's good.
That obvious. The RMA did not have that for the first,
I don't know, 20 plus years
of it's till relatively recently that was included.
Um, but we now have one in the RMA and there's one here.
And we thought that obviously that's tick one,
that's good, there's one there.
And we did look at it and we've made some pretty, you know,
quite I guess precise points.
We kinda read it quite a few times
and we thought we weren't quite sure it
was framed in the right way.
So we, we are very supportive of that clause being in there.
'cause obviously this section 11
there's gonna be a central park.
And we touchstone, as we know
with the RMAI can imagine these
things could end up in the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court musing about exactly what was meant
by these very particular words that were chosen
to put on the page as we've seen
with sections five and six in the past.
So we thought we had a look at it, we don't,
we haven't actually proposed a solution,
but we looked at the way it uses the words
proportionate and risk-based.
It just doesn't, didn't feel quite, the use
of the proportionate particular seemed to sit out as almost
as a standalone concept rather than being integrated.
We don't, I don't think that's necessarily intentional.
Uh, and I say we are looking at these
words very kind of closely.
We did, I've alluded to,
I think we mentioned our submission.
We've referenced the, um, the,
the quite new national policy statement for natural hazards
that came out just at the end of last year,
which talks about basically the same thing in policy two,
but we think it probably expresses it in a
slightly uh, crisp way.
It talks about managing things that in a way
that's proportionate to the level of national hazard risk,
which is what we think Section 11 is trying to say,
but we're not quite sure it actually says that.
So that's really just calling out that,
I guess we'd commend the committee to have take
that away back to the drafters
and have a think about whether that, if that is in fact,
which is what think is trying to convey.
'cause we're mindful this is a key part.
'cause as price has said yes,
it's very framework in legislation.
I'm sure you're aware. And this is I guess one
of the key within the whole framework
and bearing in mind a lot of it will depend on
how it's national directions made
and how people ultimately plan and consent things.
But this will be a key touchstone.
So I guess we're very focused on getting that one, getting
that one bit right and making clear that
how risks should be it should be managed.
But that's just to unpack what we on that first kind
of specific point.
Yeah. So, so the act overall kind of includes
and we look at the things that we want to see.
It talks about hazards and the need to be mindful of them.
It talks about allowing the consideration of hazards
to be part of your decisions around, um, zoning
and subdivision consents and land use consents.
And that's all very good and appropriate.
So a lot of the kind of the building blocks are there
to make good decisions,
but it doesn't necessarily require a good decision
when we say a good decision.
That is a sensible weighing up of risk, right?
We're not sitting here saying we should be
aiming to eliminate all risk.
That's a fools errand. We are never going to achieve that.
But there are sensible, rational, economically
wise choices that we can make
and we want councils
to make in a consistent way across this country to reduce,
kind of bend the curve, if we wanna put it that way.
On natural hazard risk.
As we grow, we create more risk, right? It's inevitable.
Um, but what we should be doing is proportionately we're
creating less risk over time.
We should be making better decisions over time.
And we believe that needs a lot more kind of,
much more intentional approach.
And that intentionality needs to be part of this bill, given
that section eleven's gonna be such an important touchstone.
But as we say that intentionality needs to be shown up
and supported by a whole bunch of other things
that you guys probably won't consider as a committee.
Um, you probably will news about,
and you might have an opportunity to kind of input on,
but things like the national guidance are very,
very important right at the moment.
That's not good enough in its current form.
It needs to be much more specific about
what is an acceptable level of risk
and not, there are national standards, uh, sorry,
there are New Zealand standards being produced
around risk assessment and around flood mapping.
They're an important input, but they need to be done right.
Um, and we also need
to think there's a question earlier on about
implementation and timeframes.
Um, we are creating here a set of dominoes about
what is a once in a generation change
to the planning environment in New Zealand where
we've got this bill, uh, we're reliant on national guidance.
There's not yet in place that will then start to feed into
yet to be designed adaptation planning
for high risk locations that will then, you know,
there's a set of dominoes that need to fall
before we get a very thoughtful consideration of hazards
and how we will adapt to them over time.
We need to get the building blocks right at the start.
Otherwise we will miss a very important opportunity
and we would've condemned communities, um, to having a,
an uncertain future
because they will not have taken full account
of the risks that they're facing today.
Or more importantly, the risks
that they will face over the lifetime of that community.
Or importantly, perhaps their ownership
of someone's home or business. Never there.
Look, thank you very much.
Look, I might just, um,
because you've already mentioned section 11
and it was kind of the area I was keen to explore more
'cause it's the first time that we've really kind of, uh,
addressed this, um, in this submissions.
Um, just wondering in practice,
like if you could give perhaps an example of
where you think at the moment that wording proportionate
and risk-based planning, um, you know, may not work
or, you know, could create worse situations
or concerning situations. It's
More ambiguity perhaps it's more the
what is the proportionate link to We think,
we think it is supposed to be proportionate to the risk,
but it doesn't necessarily quite say that.
And I'm not an English major, so I won't kind
of go too deep on, on that.
We, so that's why since we're calling it, we're sort
of calling it out rather than a lot
of times we do propose alternative drafting,
but it really is just the idea that, you know, it needs
to be proportionate to the risk.
And it may be that it says that,
but it's not as explicit as it could be. And
Yeah, so look, we, we,
we know practically when a council is making a choice here,
they're trading off a whole bunch of things, right?
Um, in their community, you know, what is affordable,
you know, they're thinking about amenity,
they're thinking about safety, they're thinking about
economics, lots of things that they're thinking
and trading off and making choices, right?
And so to be risk-based, excellent.
'cause that's about thinking about the risk
and taking into account the risk not only today,
but over a long period of time.
Fantastic. Like that to be proportionate.
Again, let's not get into entomology
and all that sort of stuff, but what do we mean by
that proportionate to risk?
Proportionate doesn't mean one-to-one to the risk.
It might mean half the risk,
it might be a fraction of the risk.
So it leaves open to interpretation the level of trade off
that is available, right?
And so what we see in the country is some councils
make very good decisions.
Um, sometimes they make good
decisions and they get overturned.
And sometimes we see councils make questionable decisions,
that's all because they're making different
trade offs, right?
And we don't want too much ambiguity.
We know they need to make trade offs.
We know management of risk is not absolute,
but equally, I guess all the other thing,
objectives aren't absolute either.
So we risk base is entirely appropriate,
but it needs to be proportionate
as a word could maybe be in there, maybe, maybe not.
There's a risk that gets traded, traded off
and gets sort of devalued.
Um, and we know risk management, as we touched on,
is not absolute, you know, there will always be acceptance
of risk and, and the national direction
and stuff will need to unpack.
I mean, one of the, probably the, where the current one
lacks is it doesn't have enough specificity around
what is really, it says off there's more risk.
You should be more careful, which is sensible.
But equally it's like, well, where,
where in the risk spectrum is it?
Okay, we are safe and where is not safe? So,
And, and to, we Know it started, but
Yeah, to pick up on your your question of the previous so
as well, what is the consequences of, of getting
that wrong and not having that in there?
Um, the cons of getting that wrong is development
that can't be insured.
Yeah. Okay. Well then that's the practical
Example. That's the practical example,
right?
Or, or it becomes really expensive
and it interrupts people's ability to service their loans.
It's, you know, all the classic cascading impacts of
expensive insurance
and insurance that is not available how flows
through into banking and always flows
through into people's economic wellbeing.
Um, and if you get that wrong
individually, that's one thing.
If you start to get that wrong at an area wide level
for whole communities and it has a very profound effect
and a cascading effect over the long term. Okay.
Thank thanks You, especially when we,
we are making choices here under this act
that are gonna last for a very, very long time. Yes.
Yeah. Um, Rachel?
Yes. Uh, thanks for that discussion. Sorry.
Very long answer. That's good.
Um, the,
the word threshold comes up in your submission a lot
and the, um, the need for clear thresholds
and that they aren't in this legislation,
they're not in the national instrument.
Mm-hmm. What do you imagine?
What would clear, clear thresholds look like?
Okay, I'll pass on. You can. Okay.
Um, it ties into this idea that, um,
we want this, we can either look at it in, in two ways.
Let's look it a very positive way.
The intent of this legislation is to be more permissive
to kind of go, this is development, just get on with it.
Right? So a clear threshold would allow us to say,
we know in this location the level of natural hazard risk
for safe flooding is acceptable
and will be acceptable over the lifetime.
So just get on with it. So for us,
we take about, think about flooding.
It is a clear measure of
what would be an acceptable level of risk.
Now we can talk about that in a return period.
We could say we don't want water in someone's lounge while,
while own the home, you know, some very ideally practical,
um, highly, um, easily understood measure
of risk and what we're trying to avoid, right?
Um, that's what we mean by threshold.
What is an acceptable level of risk?
What is a clearly an unacceptable level of risk?
So don't build acceptable, go for your life.
And there might be an area in the middle
where actually you need to think about that a bit more,
which I think reflects the sorts
of things this bill's trying to achieve, which is go
and build it, don't build it,
have a harder think about it. Mm-hmm.
And Cameron's got a supplementary on that
Question. So in the,
in the insurance industry, I mean, do you guys,
uh, is the insurance just going off
what councils have zoned?
I mean, I'm, or is there a risk assessment that's happening?
Um, do you just look at something
and say, oh, it's been consented, it's been built,
therefore we're going insure it.
No, We don't. So does, so um,
this hearing in your submission, a lot of, we need
to find these areas and make sure that be mm-hmm.
And otherwise someone further down the
track won't get insurance.
But if a developer can't sell to somebody
who can get a mortgage because they've got insurance,
the development won't go ahead. Correct?
Correct. So what's what, so why, um,
so do you not feel comfortable
that the insurance industry is able to assess these risks
that would lead to that chain of non-development?
Or do you feel it has to be done by councils?
No, we we're very happy to assess that we do do that.
So, you know, um,
I'm hearing your submission saying the councils need
to be more, uh, aware of this, that needs to be like these,
these risks need to be managed when it's coming
to to happen.
Yeah. What we're trying to do, we step back is, uh,
avoid a situation where there are different views of
what is an acceptable level of risk, right?
That's, that that is an outcome which will lead
to harm people, right?
We have our own models, we have our own risk appetites.
We know what we want to ensure
and what we don't want to ensure a council has another set
of decision criteria about what it will permit
or not permit the right outcome.
The best outcome is for those to be
as close together as possible.
Mm. Right? Yes.
If if they're wide apart, then we might, we might,
you might come up to us with a development, we might go,
sure, we'll ensure that and
next year we'll say that next year.
But at some point we might say no. That's
Probably the, we particularly start talking
to things are changing over time.
That's the big thing. 'cause we might have situ these areas
now, which, you know, coastal, which are perfectly,
you know, they, they're not particularly high risk at the
moment 'cause of where the way the
climate and the water levels are at.
But over time they, so we insure in the present obviously
that house people, when they build a new
house, they expect to be there for 50,
It sounds Like 50 plus years.
So it sounds like you're wanting councils
to be more risk averse for the potential risk of business
of insurers in the future.
Um, well, It's not for them.
It's not for their, I mean the point is, my question is,
are insurance policies annual?
Yes. Yes. Yeah. And are we talking about a risk
that is more than annual?
Yes. And Is a mortgage for more than an annual? Yeah.
Yeah. So it's, so it's not for the, the insurers will never,
well, we'll disagree about whether
The market can provide everything on or whether you need
Planning. The point's been made
though.
Have you got another supplementary? Okay. Uh, la
Thank you for your submission.
Um, I just wanted to ask like, clearly it makes sense
that you are focused on the natural hazard risk part.
Mm-hmm. One aspect that we've been hearing quite a lot
of from submitters is the risk
that these bills are actually gonna
reduce essentially the resilience
of our environmental integrity
or environmental outcomes generally in terms
of essentially worse outcomes for our environment.
Where does the, like ecological integrity
of the environment itself come into your risk models?
Like, do you have a view on whether, um, you know,
it's a bad thing or a good thing that this,
these bills may be more permissive when it comes to say,
environmental pollution
or, you know, the environment being in a worse state.
Do you have a view on that
or are you simply sort of at the other end within,
essentially, you know, things go wrong with a natural
disaster or whatever and you are kind
of picking up the pieces or having to react down that end?
We um, we,
our view is limited to national assets.
'cause that's pri that's a primary driver of,
um, our business.
When we refer to models, there's a model
that basically look at the risk to land to the physical land
and to the property that's so on across certain pers where
that the earthquake or, or flood or mm-hmm.
It might be. Mm-hmm. They're quite,
those models are quite narrow in there.
We Yeah. Look, we we're, we're we're alive to that, right?
Our economy sits within the context
of our natural environment.
We, we, we, we we fully understand that, um, our business
and a vast majority of our business in New Zealand
is exposed to and driven by our natural pers.
Mm-hmm. That's what we think about. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Word, Isn't it?
Yeah, it's, it's drives the majority
of your premium drives the majority of our decision.
Um, so we, that's what we focus. So pretty straight back.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today.
Uh, it was really interesting
to get perspective on natural hazards
and that kind of area of the, the bills.
So we appreciate your time, um, the insight
and so thank you very much. Thank
You. Thank you
So.